2018/lab8/readme.md, before:

# Lab 8: Practical ChIP-seq analysis

### Monday April 16, 2018, 1-3pm


Many aspects of molecular cell biology are measured using experimental technologies based on high-throughput [DNA sequencing](http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~langmea/resources/lecture_notes/dna_sequencing.pdf). Research areas that deal with these data are sometimes called [Genomics and Computational Genomics](http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~langmea/resources/lecture_notes/genomics_comp_genomics.pdf). [ChIP-seq](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ChIP-sequencing) is one such technology for detecting protein binding to DNA. We will go over practical steps of the ChIP-seq data analysis. Many of these steps and corresponding tools are representative of what could be applied to other sequencing-based data as well.

As an example, we will use Foxp3 ChIP-seq data generated from mouse Treg cells and published in [Arvey et al. Nat Immunology 2014](https://www.nature.com/articles/ni.2868) ([PMID: 24728351](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24728351)), data publicly available at [GSE55773](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE55773). We will not use all of the data, but a representative subset of samples. The data and scripts are available in several subfolders along with this readme document. (Large data files are represented only by their names, or symlinks, as placeholders.)

Folder structure:

`align`

`data`:
  `data/atacseq`

`motifs`
`peakcalling`



## Steps in analysis


### Get FASTQ files with sequenced reads

See folder `data/chipseq-fastq`.

Typically you will get the data for analysis in the FASTQ format. It may be your own data generated for you by the genomics core. There is also a lot of previously published data publicly available for analysis at data repositories. [NCBI GEO](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) is one such repository. Large consortia, such as [ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/) or [Roadmap Epigenomics](http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org/), also sometimes make the data available on their websites, in the FASTQ format and more processed formats.

Our Foxp3 data is available from GEO at [GSE55773](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE55773). For sequencing-based data, GEO contains primarily metadata of the experiments and some processed data files submitted by authors. For actual FASTQ data you need to download it from [SRA](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), linked to from the GEO entry. In our example, the data is summarized [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/study/?acc=SRP039938). These data can be obtained and manipulated using [SRA toolkit](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK158900/). After installing the toolkit, you can use one command from this toolkit, `fastq-dump`, to donwload the data directly from SRA in FASTQ format.

You can run a command such as this:

```fastq-dump -I --gzip -A SRR1186971```

which downloads a file `SRR1186971.fastq.gz`.

The script `dump-files.sh` downloads the four samples, three ChIP-seq replicates and one input DNA control.


### Align reads to genome

See folders `align` and `data/chipseq-bam`.

The first step in analysis is to align reads to genome, in order to associate each read with the most probable place of the genome where it originated. [Sequence alignment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sequence_alignment) is a classical problem in bioinformatics, with many formulations. 

One tool perfectly suitable for quick alignment of millions of the short sequencing reads to the genome is [bowtie2](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2). After installing the tool, you also need to obtain the index for the mouse genome, which is the sequence of the entire mouse genome compacted and processed into an appropriate format for running `bowtie2`. Then you can run in a command line a command such as this:

```
bowtie2 -p 10 -t --no-unal -X 500 -x mm10-bowtie2index/mm10 -U SRR1186971.fastq.gz >SRR1186971.sam 2>.bowtie2.SRR1186971
```

This produces the alignment files in the [SAM format](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf). They can be manipulated using [SAMtools](http://samtools.sourceforge.net/). You need to install the tools, and then they can be used from the command line. For example, in order to extract reads of high sequencing quality that are uniquely aligned to the genome, you can use the command `samtools view`. This produces the alignments in the BAM format. BAM is a binary version of SAM. Then the command `samtools sort` is used to sort the aligned reads by coordinate, to produce a sorted BAM file. Then the command `samtools index` produces an index file (extension `.bam.bai`) that allows for a convenient by-coordinate access to aligned reads, given the BAM file and its index.

The tool [FastQC](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) can be used to obtain summarized statistics and quality metrics for the sequencing reads, both in the aligned format (SAM or BAM), or to the raw unaligned reads (FASTQ).

The script `run-alignment.sh` aligns the four our samples to the mouse genome and filters for the uniquely aligned reads with high sequencing and mapping quality, and then produces a sorted and indexed BAMs. It also runs the quality check with FastQC.

This results in the four BAM files for our samples, along with their indix files. The script `rename-samples.sh` creates symlinks with meaningful names `foxp3_input`, `foxp3_rep1`, `foxp3_rep2`, and `foxp3_rep3`.


### Peak calling

Now we need to identify genomic regions enriched for the ChIP-seq signal, or peaks of the signal. [MACS2](https://github.com/taoliu/MACS) is a popular tool that is used for that purpose.

`macs2`


### Assign peaks to genes

R scripts using Bioconductor


### Explore in IGV




### Overlap with ATAC-seq peaks




### Find motifs

HOMER


### Compare with RNA-seq expression

Commit message:

add peak calling step to lab8:

2018/lab8/readme.md, after:

# Lab 8: Practical ChIP-seq analysis

### Monday April 16, 2018, 1-3pm


Many aspects of molecular cell biology are measured using experimental technologies based on high-throughput [DNA sequencing](http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~langmea/resources/lecture_notes/dna_sequencing.pdf). Research areas that deal with these data are sometimes called [Genomics and Computational Genomics](http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~langmea/resources/lecture_notes/genomics_comp_genomics.pdf). [ChIP-seq](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ChIP-sequencing) is one such technology for detecting protein binding to DNA. We will go over practical steps of the ChIP-seq data analysis. Many of these steps and corresponding tools are representative of what could be applied to other sequencing-based data as well.

As an example, we will use Foxp3 ChIP-seq data generated from mouse Treg cells and published in [Arvey et al. Nat Immunology 2014](https://www.nature.com/articles/ni.2868) ([PMID: 24728351](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24728351)), data publicly available at [GSE55773](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE55773). We will not use all of the data, but a representative subset of samples. The data and scripts are available in several subfolders along with this readme document. (Large data files are represented only by their names, or symlinks, as placeholders.)


## Steps in analysis


### Get FASTQ files with sequenced reads

See folder `data/chipseq-fastq`.

Typically you will get the data for analysis in the FASTQ format. It may be your own data generated for you by the genomics core. There is also a lot of previously published data publicly available for analysis at data repositories. [NCBI GEO](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) is one such repository. Large consortia, such as [ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/) or [Roadmap Epigenomics](http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org/), also sometimes make the data available on their websites, in the FASTQ format and more processed formats.

Our Foxp3 data is available from GEO at [GSE55773](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE55773). For sequencing-based data, GEO contains primarily metadata of the experiments and some processed data files submitted by authors. For actual FASTQ data you need to download it from [SRA](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), linked to from the GEO entry. In our example, the data is summarized [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/study/?acc=SRP039938). These data can be obtained and manipulated using [SRA toolkit](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK158900/). After installing the toolkit, you can use one command from this toolkit, `fastq-dump`, to donwload the data directly from SRA in FASTQ format.

You can run a command such as this:

```
fastq-dump -I --gzip -A SRR1186971
```

which downloads a file `SRR1186971.fastq.gz`.

The script `dump-files.sh` downloads the four samples, three ChIP-seq replicates and one input DNA control.


### Align reads to genome

See folders `align` and `data/chipseq-bam`.

The first step in analysis is to align reads to genome, in order to associate each read with the most probable place of the genome where it originated. [Sequence alignment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sequence_alignment) is a classical problem in bioinformatics, with many formulations. 

One tool perfectly suitable for quick alignment of millions of the short sequencing reads to the genome is [bowtie2](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2). After installing the tool, you also need to obtain the index for the mouse genome, which is the sequence of the entire mouse genome compacted and processed into an appropriate format for running `bowtie2`. Then you can run in a command line a command such as this:

```
bowtie2 -p 10 -t --no-unal -X 500 -x mm10-bowtie2index/mm10 -U SRR1186971.fastq.gz >SRR1186971.sam 2>.bowtie2.SRR1186971
```

This produces the alignment files in the [SAM format](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf). They can be manipulated using [SAMtools](http://samtools.sourceforge.net/). You need to install the tools, and then they can be used from the command line. For example, in order to extract reads of high sequencing quality that are uniquely aligned to the genome, you can use the command `samtools view`. This produces the alignments in the BAM format. BAM is a binary version of SAM. Then the command `samtools sort` is used to sort the aligned reads by coordinate, to produce a sorted BAM file. Then the command `samtools index` produces an index file (extension `.bam.bai`) that allows for a convenient by-coordinate access to aligned reads, given the BAM file and its index.

The tool [FastQC](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) can be used to obtain summarized statistics and quality metrics for the sequencing reads, both in the aligned format (SAM or BAM), or to the raw unaligned reads (FASTQ).

The script `run-alignment.sh` aligns the four our samples to the mouse genome and filters for the uniquely aligned reads with high sequencing and mapping quality, and then produces a sorted and indexed BAMs. It also runs the quality check with FastQC.

This results in the four BAM files for our samples, along with their indix files. The script `rename-samples.sh` creates symlinks with meaningful names `foxp3_input`, `foxp3_rep1`, `foxp3_rep2`, and `foxp3_rep3`.


### Call peaks for each replicate

See folder `peakcalling`.

Now we need to identify genomic regions enriched for the ChIP-seq signal, or peaks of the signal. These are the regions where we expect Foxp3 is bound to the genome. [MACS2](https://github.com/taoliu/MACS) is a popular tool that is used for that purpose. You need to install the tool, and then you can run it it from a command line like this:

```
macs2 callpeak -t foxp3_rep1.bam -c foxp3_input.bam -f BAM -n $prefix -B --SPMR --outdir peaks-macs2/foxp3_rep1/ -g mm -p 0.1 --keep-dup 'auto' --call-summits 2>.macs
```

This command produces a number of files in folder `peaks-macs2/foxp3_rep1/` that are useful for further analysis and visualization. File `peaks-macs2/foxp3_rep1/foxp3_rep1_peaks.narrowPeak` contains the peaks in a [narrowPeak format](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format12) that is an extended version of [BED format](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1). File `peaks-macs2/foxp3_rep1/foxp3_rep1_model.r` is an R script that can produce a PDF file with diagnostics plots. To produce this file, run `Rscript --vanilla foxp3_rep1_model.r` in the folder that contains the file.


### Identify reproducible peaks



### Find motifs

HOMER tool.



### Explore in IGV

Use IGV tool.



### Assign peaks to genes

R scripts using Bioconductor.


### Overlap with ATAC-seq peaks




### Compare with RNA-seq expression
